>> People have been using
various forms of energy
medicine for thousands of
years, yet it has never been
rigorously studied as a
scientifically verifiable form
of healing until now.
This is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Energy medicine is
based on the idea
that our physical body is
just a part of what we are.
We also have an energetic
body which can be manipulated
and channeled to create physical
changes resulting in healing.
While the anecdotal reports of
the success of these modalities
over the ages are
plentiful, energy medicine
has always been relegated to
the realm of pseudoscience
by the mainstream
scientific community.
Recently, however, the Institute
of Noetic Sciences, or IONS,
has sought to change that
by conducting a pilot
study investigating the effects
of energy medicine treatments
on pain reduction.
Dr. Garret Yount is a scientist
at the institute, which
is focused on applying
scientific methods to studying
consciousness and reality.
He was the lead
author of the study
and had this to say
about what motivated it.
>> The motivation for the study
comes from the fact that a lot
of people experience
benefit from energy medicine
modalities, but we don't really
understand why or how exactly.
So the goal of this
pilot study was
to set up a controlled
scientific setting
and see if we could bring
energy medicine practitioners
into this laboratory
setting and study it
with the standard
tools of science.
>> Researchers enlisted
190 participants,
all of whom suffered from
chronic carpal tunnel pain
of the wrist, which
significantly interfered with
their lives.
Every participant was treated
in one 30-minute session
by one of 17 energy medicine
practitioners who had
been selected for the study.
Each of the practitioners
practiced a different energy
healing modality ranging from
Reiki to shamanic healing.
>> The goal of this pilot study
was to assess the feasibility
of studying energy medicine
under these rigorous scientific
conditions.
So the setting was an
electromagnetically shielded
room, so a big metal
box, basically,
big enough for a couple
of people to get in.
We set the folks down with pain.
We hooked them up
with electrodes,
a bunch of gizmos in there.
So we had many different types
of energy medicine represented.
We wanted to
consider all of this
together and standardize it, so
we limited the amount of time
to 30 minutes with a single
30-minute energy medicine
treatment.
>> Given the range of
different healing modalities,
the treatment experience
varied with each practitioner.
For the intent of this
study, researchers
chose not to differentiate
between the modalities,
rather assessing
them all as one.
>> So the range of types of
treatment were mostly no touch.
There were a few of
the practitioners
that did apply light touch.
Most of them were silent.
Some of the practitioners
did vocalize.
>> Numerous outcome measures
were taken before, during,
and after each session.
The results were promising.
>> So the main outcome of this
study was that pain reduction
was achieved.
So these folks did experience
relief from their pain.
And so the way we
assess that is-- the way
to test clinically is
a self-rating of pain
on a scale from 1 to 10.
So what we found on average was
a two-point drop in that scale,
both immediately after the
energy medicine session
and also at the three-week
follow-up point.
This is considered
clinically significant,
and this is the kind
of relief that folks
would receive from taking
pain meds, for example.
The difference is that you'd
have to take that daily.
>> In addition to
measuring pain relief,
researchers also looked at
measures of interference with
daily life, and all showed
improvement after treatment.
While these findings
were significant,
Dr. Yount sees the greater
implications of this study.
>> So the goal of the
pilot study was to assess
the feasibility of bringing
practitioners into this sterile
environment.
And does it work,
and is it feasible?
And so the answer is yes.
We were actually able to
see that energy medicine was
effective.
So I think this is really
important for future work
now that emboldens
scientists to be
able to apply their rigorous
standards of science
to study this phenomenon.
And the goal of that is to
understand the mechanism of it.
>> Dr. Yount is hopeful that
this study will serve to set
the stage for future research
to delve into just how energy
medicine works.
And that may have even
more far-reaching effects.
>> I'd say one of the end goals
of this is to level the playing
field in terms of how energy
medicine is seen among
the other modalities of healing.
And I think that applying
the scientific lens
will go a long
way to doing that.
>> IONS is already going forward
with further study which many
hope will ultimately lead to
energy medicine's integration
within the health care system so
as to be available to all those
who could benefit from it.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."